[Music]
one connection between these two cities
his name is Mike Fisher right Mike
Fisher of the who just retired as the
captain of the national predator
predators and he played for the Senators
for quite a while right so thank you for
that warm introduction it's my first
time being here I've been to Montreal
for conferences and to Toronto but this
my first time to the capital of Canada
tonight we're gonna talk about these two
words quest and pursuit as as it was
introduced I didn't grow up and I'll
talk more about this tomorrow but I was
nurtured in an atheist home and my two
nephews at Yale with a couple of
religious studies classes basically
convinced me that religion is basically
panacea or opioid for the masses and it
can't be true and so on and so forth so
and I'll unpack that a lot more tomorrow
but I want to start with acknowledging
the fact that I have questions I have
doubts but these doubts that I do have
are not defeatist for me to walk away
from the truthfulness and truth of the
Christian religion or the relationship
that God has initiated with many of us
here in this room but so I want to
acknowledge the fact that the way that I
approach this topic may be slightly
different although maybe that is
self-full exemplified a diversity of
perspectives within evangelical
Christianity that we have I thought it
was really remarkable to hear from a
Canadian and of
French person as well as someone who
converted to Christianity from Islam so
there is already a kind of an emerging
symphonic discourse about what it means
to worship this Living God I want to
start by asking this question and
there's a book along these along this
title good without God is it possible to
be without God many of us who are not
believers might say of course it is
possible some of us who are Christians
might also say the same thing I want us
to think about that a little bit today
good without God with a question mark
greg epstein who is the secular chaplain
at Harvard University has written that
book good without God arguing that it is
entirely possible to be good without God
I realized that some people may be
sitting there saying no it is not
possible because as Jesus said only God
alone is good and so on and so forth
so we'll try to unpack that a little bit
if not tonight then certainly turning on
into my second talk tomorrow afternoon
good without God and flipping it on his
head bad with God why are you bad even
if you're with God and I want to kind of
present to you some of the hurdles for
many in terms of their refusal to
acknowledge the credibility of
Christianity has far less to do in my
humble opinion with the person of Jesus
or the work of Jesus or even with the
New Testament texts themselves but far
more to do with the kind of problem of
lack of discipleship that we see so one
us especially if you're a Christian I
want us to be honest with God and honest
to God because I want to underscore this
very important fact that just because
you're not able to answer a question
about God
does not does not disprove the existence
of God I don't know about you but I
became a Christian in 1988 so it's not
spin what is it about almost through
twenty nine years and I came to realize
that the proof is not I don't have to
try to be omniscient or semi omniscient
I don't have to be all-knowing and in my
journey in some of the schools that were
mentioned I came to realize that I know
a thing or two but they're there about
50 gazillion things that I do not know
and it's okay and oftentimes Christians
and non-christians in their apologetic
engagement tend to set up strongmen and
they beat it to a pulp and declare
victory and I don't want to do that here
with you tonight
as George mentioned these spiritual but
not religious they're often called a
nun's a no and es not an UNS so I know
NES they make up about 23% of the u.s.
population and I suspect a percentage
point may be higher here in Canada
though I couldn't be so certain of it
myself
spiritual but not religious so there are
multiple ways of engaging this
particular demographic and I was
Nashville actually is I don't know if
you know but it's allegedly the buckle
of the Bible Belt but also at the same
time because of the kind of veneer or
thick layer of civic religion or kind of
civil Christianity there have been a lot
of people who have become more jaundiced
or disillusioned with that particular
southern American Christianity and then
declaring themselves to be nuns three
things emerge as I talk with them and in
my kind of conversations with them three
words that begin with I irrelevance
irresponsibility and
reality irrelevance why does it matter
that Jesus rose again from the dead so
what does that necessarily preclude the
possibility of me delving into yoga and
Hindu istic practices and reading some
Buddhist literature's so the irrelevance
of the Christian particularity and
secondly irresponsibility while the
world is dying some Christians as many
would say are busy building their
churches and doing this in that other
project and they're basically create
themselves a holy huddle and that's what
they seem to be busy themselves all the
time
irrelevance irresponsibility and also
immorality it could be the purpose the
perpetration of abuse by pastors
increase upon the most vulnerable of our
human civilization even population and
because of the immoral practices of some
of the Christians many have become nuns
and so I was giving a talk about a month
ago at Harvard Divinity School they as
some of you may remember Monday this
week was the Tuesday this week was the
500th anniversary of the nailing or
mailing of the 95 pcs by Martin Luther
scholars are pretty sure that he didn't
nail them but we do know for sure that
he mailed them because it really kind of
unleashed this revolutionary potential
to clean up or reform certain aspects of
late medieval Christianity and get the
ball rolling in terms of this thing
called early modern or modern world that
we know it so the talk that I gave at
Harvard was entitled Reformation and
racial taxonomies I won't go into the
details at all because I know how I'm
sure I'll lose a lot of you but let me
just share with you the gist of my talk
the gist of my talk was this that some
of the biggest promoters of social just
justice in the world in the early modern
world were Christians some of the
biggest promoters of social justice or
Christians and at the same time some of
the biggest preventers of Shalom and
social justice or Christians and I think
often
I find myself kind of seeing that some
people if you're kind of radical left or
non-christian you tend to really gloat
over the errors and moral moral and
ethical lapses of the Christian
community and if you're more
center-right and right-wing then you
tend to be busying yourself with
covering up some of the things and say
you know if you actually understand it
better
you're not gonna say something like that
and so I as a historian who has been
trained in early modern English history
or Reformation and post-reformation
England so King James Bible and the
Puritans
and particularly the whole controversies
around the Trinity after the Reformation
have been some of the academic or
intellectual and professional pursuits
research questions that I have
but along with all of that is a question
of unbelief that became really Unleashed
with the Enlightenment and so that's
kind of my what I think about and write
about every day and there is a sort of a
professional hazard that are related to
that but the question once again is how
to go on a religious quest and I want to
kind of step back and reassess this
issue by saying why is it that some or
many have decided to jettison the
credibility structure of Christianity in
terms of the Orthodox version thereof
you know I think the word quest is very
important when I want to share this I
say that quest if you don't do it
rightly it'll end up in conquest that if
you're trying to kind of learn something
but you don't take the time to really
develop the relationship with somebody
else
that you basically pick and choose
whatever you like so if the quest does
not lead to communion it also easily
need to conquest I want you to think
about this I want you to just kind of
imagine you know the Hubble telescope or
Carl Sagan or nova or think about think
of the
the vast canopy of stars or galaxies
think about that in your heart right now
imagine think about the immensity of the
universe and the seeming infinity of
cosmos think about that just imagine
right now think of the Stars think of
the galaxies the millions and billions
of galaxies that are in this universe
think about the immensity or you know
alleged infinity it's not infinite but
think about the immensity of the
universe and think about what this
hebrew poet says in psalm 8 when I
consider your heavens the work of your
fingers the moon and the stars which you
have set in place what is man that you
are mindful of them human beings that
you care for them you see there have
been tens of thousands of different
religious pursuits human beings have
been in this business of creating you
know kind of religions and creating gods
in their own image perhaps and that's
true and that's one way that Calvin has
tried to explain the whole nature of
Idol Factory that our hearts are but
think about the fact that there is a
such an immense universe that is out
there and there is somebody out there
and that somebody is out there desiring
that we draw closer to that somebody so
the question becomes what are you
looking for what are we looking for
today have we found it how do we really
know I think it is vitally crucial for
us to raise those questions even if
you're a Christian and you feel like I
found the answer even if it becomes a
mere intellectual exercise but I do
believe that as you delve into these
questions I think especially if you're a
Christian you will walk away from this
conference with a profound heart of
gratitude that God who is
artificer of all of these galaxies upon
galaxies God who is beyond all beyond
time in above time and end time that
this God has busied himself in creating
this world and calling me to himself and
giving me an identity giving me the
potential giving me the desire to draw
to God as God has taken the first step
to draw nearer to us some of you may be
familiar with the name Augustine of
Hippo a 4th century North African
Christian he begins his confessions with
these words and I want us to dwell on
this a little bit you have made us for
yourself and our hearts are restless
until they find their rest in you you
have made us for yourself Oh God
so our hearts are restless until they
find their rest in you one of the
reasons why Augustine's Confessions had
been read as a very integral part of
Western Civ kind of courses in many
universities in Europe and North America
is because Augustine stands is sort of
the prototypical figure of somebody who
is in this project of quest he's looking
for something he's in search of
something he is on route to finding
something and that something becomes
himself and there's a very interesting
kind of logic that is at work here the
one is that there is a relation ality
established you have made us there is
this kind of he acknowledged that there
is a creator as he as we look around we
can either conclude that we are products
of time plus transports matter and
that's entirely possible warrant herbal
conclusion for some people or for others
they arrive at this conclusion that you
know if when I think about this
immensity of this universe I come to
realize the absolute insignificance of
Who I am in what I
therefore my sense of wonder is evoked
and enhance as the psalmist said you
know who am i that you care for me
so Augustine says you know you made us
for yourself that you are my Creator but
also there's an honest about the human
condition our hearts are restless you
know what part of the you know because
you're restless we write music we write
songs we write poetry we write stories
we get we we drink and we have sex and
we take drugs cannabis or whatever and
we busy ourselves because in some ways
we're trying to forget about Godot
we're trying to forget about you know
that God figure we think that by
avoiding God we'll be okay
but as Augustine says you know what our
hearts are going to be restless there is
going to be the restlessness that we're
going to wrestle with there are our life
until they find their rest in you so the
third point that Augustine shows here is
very clearly resting in God as the
pathway toward that that that finding
yourself that in this religious quest
the religious questions basically
inserts of identity let me say it again
people's religious quest is basically
you're trying to find yourself you find
gods or goddesses or you know God and in
doing so what you're doing is you also
find who you are in relation to that
particular deity you're coming to this
conclusion
AHA that's who I am so what is this
again back to Augustine there is a
creator and the Creator has created us
in such a way that we're going to have
this kind of uneasiness something that
we're kind of recognizing as this is not
all there is to be there this is not all
that Psalm cracked all that I'm cracked
up to be that there's got to be more
there's got to be more and no question
says you know when I find my rest in you
and you we'll talk about this later on
in his confessions two things will
happen I'll find my rest
but at the same time this wonderful God
who is deeply satisfied in me as he is
in the Sun he will create within me
greater thirst greater hunger greater
yearning so then this yearning becomes
not one of restlessness but one of
rejoicing this hunger and thirst becomes
not life not death giving not taking
away of life but it's life giving and
also it really provides us with that
true identity and joy so as we will talk
about tomorrow again you know for me as
I my own research field is not New
Testament studies it's not comparative
religions it is early modern European
intellectual history meaning that how
did this whole like kind of this
cultural plausibility structure of
religions other than Christianity gained
further and further foothold and
ascendancy and because of my own story
as we will be talking tomorrow I have
talked a lot about and wrestled with
these all issues of epistemic and
ethical D feeders potential epistemic
and ethical D feeders to the Christian
faith meaning this that there are what I
would call six factors that play a role
in terms of people wanting to take their
spiritual quest away from the
traditional route of Christianity and
walking away the increasing number of
nuns why is it yes we have talked about
it as irrelevance and irresponsibility
and immorality but to be more specific I
want to share six things with you and
then we will actually I'm actually quite
surprised I've only spoken for 17
minutes I always go over time so I kind
of lost it and I'm gonna be done pretty
quickly so I guess that'll be very very
good for many of you here right like
yeah this is you go to a conference and
you get done or early
then scheduled an you I guess we have a
little more time for Q&A but six are as
follows biblical historical and textual
and transmission alysha's so Namie and I
think dr. lacunae will talk about it
tomorrow the whole biblical textual
critical matters right so is the Bible
true is a Bible errant or inerrant or
infallible what does it mean and I think
these have kind of come up much more
ferociously since the Enlightenment or
the kind of a rise of kind of
grammatical historical exegesis
ironically so it's a very interesting
question of text critical issues that
many have said okay look at the Bible if
you actually just study these texts and
different kind of aberrations between
manuscripts you cannot really believe
this to be the case and I'm sure we'll
be really enlightened tomorrow from dr.
Locke owners talk now the second
potential epistemic and ethical defeater
is this science versus religion right so
next week at Vanderbilt there is gonna
be a very TAS forum which is one of the
ministries of InterVarsity Christian
Fellowship and we're having an MIT
professor who is one of the leading
professors in his own field I think he
does a biochemistry and then there is a
dear friend of mine who is a Vanderbilt
so MIT Christian and Vanderbilt agnostic
Hagen both scientists and my friend at
Vanderbilt is an astrophysicist and
they're gonna talk about the whole issue
of science and Christianity and so if
you think about this whole matter I mean
for many people science has become a new
religion scientism right and science in
science we trust science will be able to
provide all the solutions or most of the
solutions that we're looking for from
human woes and problems and because of
the sort of a you know Scopes trial and
the whole evolutionary paradigms and
perspectives of looking at this universe
and the
the earth doesn't seem that young
anymore as a result I think many have
concluded I would say erroneously that
there is an incompatibility kind of or
the impossibility of coexistence between
science and Christianity so and I think
that has a lot to do with this kind of
scientific revolution and the church's
role in hindering or helping the
progress of science the third potential
epistemic and ethical defeater is the
question of theodicy meaning the whole
problem of evil and Providence so at our
church in Nashville at Christ
Presbyterian Church I have the privilege
of being their scholar in residence and
what that means among others is I
preached about six seven times a year
and every Sunday about 30 Sunday's out
of the year I teach Sunday school and a
couple of Sundays ago I looked around
and there are about 60 or so people in
the classroom and I realized that there
are two parents two sets of parents who
had to say goodbye to their kids with
zero preparation that a middle school
student as well as a college student
just died on them the question of the
Odyssey it's not just you know the
Lisbon earthquake in mid 18th century
that prompted Voltaire to write this
poem Candide raising the question about
the credibility of Christian deity but
in our stories in our lives we have
stories upon stories of asking that
question how long oh Lord
how long so I've been available for 12
years and one of my greatest delights of
being available is the opportunity that
I have to teach at this maximum-security
prison in River Bend which is about 20
minutes from Nashville and one of the
courses that I've taught there a couple
of times is this theodicy class and you
know the poignancy of talking about the
problem of evil in this maximum-security
prison and wrestling with the issues of
human entrapment and most of the inmates
were the insiders as they are called
most of my brothers are cognizant of the
fact that it you can simply blame God
there is a human responsibility and
human can owning up of some of our you
know many of our issues both
individually and institutionally
individually as well as structurally and
systematically but the question of
theodicy has been one of those kind of
perennial topics but has become much
more intensified as we have the New
Atheists
and other scholars that have talked
about these matters more recently
fourthly it is what I would call
Christians behaving badly so there is a
American TV show sitcom called Men
Behaving Badly
and I would say that it is the
Christians behaving badly or laps
discipleship that has become one of the
defeatist again you know I think this is
one of the major issues that we have to
take very seriously in our kind of
pursuit of religious quest or pursuit of
God so a number of years ago I think was
in 1997 1996 I had the opportunity to
work with some of the students with Cru
used to be called Campus Crusade for
Christ down in in New York City at
Columbia University and so I would go up
there from Princeton to New York every
Wednesday and kind of talk about
cultural apologetics I think I used we
used RC sprawls reason to believe I
think and so we studied that first
semester and then they said okay now
that as the sort of climax event what
we're going to do is I don't know if
you've been to Columbia University
there's a beautiful library and then
there are these steps and then there's a
little Plaza area and it's like really
there's a heavy foot traffic their
students ride their bicycles or ride
there
you know skateboards or walk and so they
said okay we wanna we're gonna put like
up a white board or black board right in
the middle of that walk pathway and
we're gonna write questions does God
exist or if God exists why there are so
many problems of evil and suffering and
then what we want you to do is we want
you to stand there from 9:00 a.m. until
1:00 p.m. for 4 hours and then we'll ask
questions there any question they will
ask you should answer I said and I want
you to tell them look I far prefer just
prepared talks right because I can
prepare my talk and speak for about 40
minutes or 30 minutes in this case and
then I'll be done and and don't be
doesn't Q&A but you know it's far easier
than just standing in the middle of the
you know basically Plaza and anyone can
walk up and ask questions so among other
questions it was about sort of
credibility of Christian scriptures
versus the Quran and you know host of
other factors and I did my valiant best
to try to you know bumbling Li kind of
try to answer some of those questions
and so by about noon there is had a lot
of kind of students and other people
just looking on and asking questions and
engage in a conversation and I was like
you know initially I was praying at nine
o'clock I was like lord please don't let
anyone come this way but then God didn't
answer that prayer God sent quite a few
people and ask questions and but I think
I grossly underestimated the work that
God could do through human frailty and I
was doing okay just okay and I was
looking at my watch it was like okay I
don't have to go go for another 40
minutes and I can go home what a
terrible attitude terrible you know
that's that's so toward the end of my
last half-hour of my being there
standing there Norvin you know
nerve-wracking Lee there was a student
and there was somebody who asked this
question said you know what if you if
you say that Jesus is you know the Lord
of all and if Christianity is true and
wonderful and whatever how do you
account for all the atrocities that you
guys have committed in the name of God
and in particular the Holocaust it said
okay can I ask you a question
he says sure I said what can I ask what
death NIC background you come from and
he says does it matter I said I don't
know but it might matter and he said I'm
a Jew and I said you know what before I
try to answer you know anything at all
can I tell you can I offer you my
personal apology for the things that my
brothers and my sisters might have done
in the name of Christ and then this is
what he said he said I'm not talking
about Chinese people
I said I understand that you're not
talking about Chinese people I'm
actually talking about and I said you
know there's something called
the blood of Jesus being thicker than
the blood of my parents that in my
travels to Ethiopia or Sri Lanka or
India or Poland or England or wherever
Vietnam I can look at somebody with a
brown skin or yellow skin or white skin
and say you know you're my brother
you're my sister I think one of the most
subversive and revolutionary teachings
about early Christianity was that it
really cut across the social economic
and ethnic boundaries so when I
apologize this is before John Paul the
2nd Pope John Paul the second official
apology you know to the Jews and I
didn't realize it but it there there it
was and after one o'clock came everyone
started to go home and he kind of stuck
around and so I asked him you know what
brought you to this place and he was
actually a law student at Columbia
University so and then he said you know
I've gone to a lot of these Bible
studies and he was always trying to kind
of get Christians to talk about this and
I asked him so did my answer satisfy you
did my you know answer by way of apology
satisfy you and this is what he said
there's something that I'll never forget
and this is before I went off to do my
graduate studies in England and that
really kind of resonated with me deeply
he said you didn't really answer the
question of my mind but you really
answer in a way the question of my heart
okay
and that's what I came to realize you
know what human beings are not merely
intellectual kind of downloadable
machines that in my journey because you
know God had it very strangely in terms
of God's providence my wife and I when
were finishing up our studies in England
we were planning to go to Inca India to
be missionary profs there in Pune but
God somehow closed that door
and so unbeknownst me God had a plan for
me to go to Gordon Conwell Theological
Seminary in hamilton massachusetts so
from 2001 to 2006 on planet lee we went
to boston lived here for five years and
then on planet lee god opened this door
to teach at vanderbilt university and I
went there I remember telling my friends
I'm going as an academic missionary so I
think in the Divinity School where I
have my primary appointment I'm the only
out evangelical someone who's openly an
evangelical and I have you know but it's
been a very very interesting journey
that I came to realize in my attempt to
understand the mind of God in mind of
humans in in terms of history and you
know religious history history of
Christian thought and intellectual
history I came to realize that yes
there are these intellectual questions
that must be answered to the best of our
ability but at the same time there is
these things called the the hurts and
the wounds and the rejections and the
kind of heart hurt the wound of the
heart and for this particular brother
Jewish brother when I said I am sorry
and please accept my apology for and
forgiveness and I said would you forgive
me for the sins of my brothers and
sisters and I think you know in a way
that I haven't forgotten about that one
particular episode for me that was the
highlight of my time spent with the
students at Columbia it wasn't so much
about teaching apologetics although that
was helpful but that brief engagement
where this person said you didn't answer
the question of my mind but you answer
the question of my heart in ways that I
did not expect
fifthly fifth potential epistemic and
ethical defeater is the question of
Christian uniqueness is Christianity
truly unique in what ways is it unique
is Christian scripture truly unique a
what in what ways is it truly unique
these are I think the questions that we
will not answer to everyone's
satisfaction during this conference if
this wets your intellectual and
Theological appetite into a greater
quest of this
out of the Old Testament and a New
Testament the triune God who has
revealed himself before creation ever
came to be and who will be throughout
eternity that this question of Christian
uniqueness I hope will be one of those
things that you will continue to wrestle
with but it's not just mere kind of
jabbing you're you know from throwing
punches in midair without any aim the
last point is about the person of Jesus
which is not a particular defeat or as
much as the answer or potential solution
for me without sounding to
reductionistic it really for me the
quest for meaning and joy and happiness
as I'll share more tomorrow really came
down to this person of Jesus before whom
I didn't have to try to pretend to be
someone I really wasn't anymore
that leads me to this story in the
Gospel of John in the first chapter
there's a story of Philip and Nathaniel
and it's one of my favorite stories in
all of the New Testament Philip says
come and see because Philip finds his
friends and a friend Nathaniel and he
says we found one about whom Moses said
written and then you know do you
remember Nathaniel's retort Nathaniel
basically says you know what can
anything good come out of Nazareth
it'll be tantamount to saying something
like I don't know can anything good come
out of you fill in the blank as the most
potent city or province in Canada or the
United States of America
you know it's can anything good come out
Apple Oxley Mississippi where Elvis came
out of Biloxi Mississippi so it's not
that bad but you get what I'm saying so
Ken and so this question of can anything
good come out of Nazareth and then Jesus
looks at Nathanael and this is what he
said here truly is an Israelite in whom
no this seat wells and then Nathanael
asked Jesus how do you know me and then
jesus said I saw you under the fig tree
before Philip called you you know for me
that the beauty is 1 what was Philip
says to Nathanael come and see
it's an invitation Philip says you know
what I don't know
I don't have all the answers but I think
I found the one I think I found one say
your job yes
study you know the you know about the
resurrection about history of Christian
theology history of Christianity
contemporary ideologies and all of that
but in the end Indy and I always come
down to this you know coming out sharing
with with a brother here earlier tonight
that you know what I far prefer
preaching because when I preach it is
the power of the gospel is the power of
God to say the burden is not up to me it
is up to God to do it and I was very
much involved in apologetics before and
I'm really excited to be and there's a
sort of sense of rejuvenation within me
to be involved in this again but with a
much more kind of Chason epistemic
confidence okay meaning that I believe
that God is going to do God's work and
it is entirely up to God and is not on
my kind of frailty I just have to do the
very best I can and leave everything
entirely up to God and all I need to say
come and see and meet Jesus because he
will answer the questions of your heart
and head in ways and nothing else can so
I want to leave you with these words
from Jeremiah 29 in that people Bible
text in that kind of exilic community
that that they are now experiencing
exile
okay scholars can debate about whether
it was written like way later all right
that's not the point and I always share
this with my critical scholar
scholar colleagues like look okay when
Jeremiah was written to me in some ways
absolutely irrelevant we have I'm sort
of a Canon critic we have to deal with
the fact that it is there it is in the
Bible and we have to wrestle with it it
says in Jeremiah 29:11 for I know the
plan I have for you plans to prosper you
and not to harm you plans to give you
hope and a future
then you will all call on me and come
and pray to me and I will listen you
will seek me and find me when you seek
me with all your heart I will be found
by you you see friends this is it - this
exilic community
to the people who are desolate who have
been defeated whose national security
had been robbed of them whose national
pride had been now if you know
completely evaporated to these losers of
history God comes and says you know what
I got a plan for you
I got a plan not to harm you but to give
you hope I got a plan to prosper you and
you will find me if you seek me with all
your heart God is guaranteeing gazprom
God's presence God is guaranteeing that
God's perennial hope for the people of
God
you see dearly beloved that's what this
is all about as you're seeking God and I
hope that you will seek God with this
confidence what less than you begin will
call proper confidence proper confidence
in the gospel proper confidence in the
persons of the triune God God we spoke
through the Prophet Jeremiah God who
spoke through the Evangelist John God
who speaks through you and me let's
continue to draw our strength and our
hope in this God and God alone because
God says you know what as you're in this
quest to find yourself in me have this
joy in knowing that I have already found
you and even the very fact that you are
moving toward me that would be
impossible had I not already drawn
myself closer to you may you find this
God to be worthy of your life's greatest
joy and greatest challenge thank you
very much
[Applause]
[Music]
you